In this video, we'll learn
how to invoke base class
constructors and pass in
arguments from the derived class.
Remember, since the base part of a
derived class must be initialized
first, then we know that some
base class constructor must be
invoked to do that initialization.
So in this video, we'll learn
how to control exactly which
base constructor will be used.
We can determine which base
constructor to be used based on
the arguments that we want to
pass to it from the derived class.
So let's see how we can do this.
In this example, we have a base class.
And let's assume that that base
class has a no args constructor
and an overloaded constructor that
expects a single integer parameter.
Now we have a derived class,
which is derived from base.
And the derived class has
a constructor that has a
single integer parameter.
We can invoke the base classes
overloaded constructor in the
derived constructor's initialization
list, as shown in this slide.
That's it. It's pretty simple in clear syntax.
In this case, we're passing
the integer x to our base class
constructor when it's invoked.
Following this, we can have
initializers for the derived
classes attributes as needed.
Finally, we have the code in the body.
But remember, this code executes after
both the base and derived parts of the
derived object have been initialized.
If we don't explicitly invoke
the base overloaded constructor.
Then the no args constructor will be
invoked automatically since remember
the base part must be initialized.
So let's see the complete example.
Here we see the base class
declaration, pretty standard code.
The base class has an integer
attribute named value, and
it has two constructors.
The first constructor is the
no args constructor, and it
initializes value to 0 and
displays base no args constructor.
The second constructor is an
overloaded constructor that expects
a single integer parameter, and it
initializes value to the integer x and
then it displays int base constructor.
Now let's see the derived class.
The derived class is derived
from base using public
inheritance, and it has an integer
attribute named doubled value.
It also has two constructors.
The first constructor is
the no args constructor.
Note that in its initializer list.
It explicitly invokes the base no
args constructor and then initializes
its own double value attribute.
Finally, it displays
drive no args constructor.
The second constructor is the
overloaded constructor that
expects an integer parameter.
This constructor also invokes
the base class overloaded in
constructor in its initializer list.
And then it initializes its own
doubled value attribute to 2 times x.
And finally, it displays
int derived constructor.
Note that we could have implemented
the overloaded constructors
as delegating constructors.
But I wanted to keep the
display messages clear so that
we could follow the calls.
So now let's create a few
objects and see what's called.
First, let's create a simple
base object with no parameters.
In this case, the base no
args constructor is called.
In the second example, we're creating
a base object and providing an
integer initialization argument.
This will invoke the overloaded int
base constructor as we would expect.
Now in the third example,
we're creating a derived
object with no parameters.
This will invoke the derived no args
constructor, which, in turn, will
invoke the base no args constructor
from its initialization list.
Once the base part is initialized,
then the rest of the derived
no args constructor executes.
So you can see the
output is what we expect.
First, the base no args constructor
then the derived no args constructor.
The last example works
in the similar way.
We're creating a derived object with
an integer initialization argument.
So the derived int derived
constructor is invoked, and
then we explicitly invoke the
int base constructor from it.
So the first int base
constructor executes and then
the int derived constructor.
Of course, all these objects will
be destroyed by the destructors
when they go out of scope.
You can see that we have complete
control as to which base class
constructors to invoke from
our derived class constructors.
So let's head over to the IDE and
see this behavior in life code.
Okay, so I'm in the IDE, and I'm
in the section 15 workspace
in the BaseClassInitialization project.
This project looks very
very similar to the one we
did in the previous video.
However, I've spread out the code a
little bit more just so it's easier to
see in the debugger what's going on.
And what I'm doing here is I'm
explicitly calling my base class
initializers from my derived class.
So you can see here that I've got a
no args constructor in my drive class.
And I'm explicitly calling my base
classes no args instructor right here.
Similarly, in the overloaded
integer constructor from my drive
class, I'm calling my base classes
overloaded integer constructor.
Okay, that way I've got explicit
control over how my objects
are being created, not just my
part but my base part as well.
So let's run through some examples.
We won't do the base ones because
those haven't changed at all.
We'll just worry about
the derived ones.
So in this case let's create
a derived object, and we'll
call it d, and we'll provide no
initialization information here.
So we'll run the debugger
and step through it.
So we're here on line 40,
and we're just about to
create that derived object d.
Again, I've got no
initialization information.
So I expect my no args
derived constructor be
called right here on line 26.
And if I step through it, you can see
that, that's exactly where I'm at.
But now in this case, I'm explicitly
invoking my base class constructor
also the no args constructor, and I'll
scroll up just a little bit so it's
going to be right there on line 11.
So what's going to happen
now is and it's important to
understand the order here.
Before my attributes are initialized,
right, doubled value is my attribute
right here I'm a derived class.
Before my attributes were initialized,
before the body of the derived
constructor is initialized, the
base part of me will be initialized.
So in this case, when I step
through, you'll see that transfers
control up to here on line 11.
And the base no args constructor is
called it'll set that value right
here in the base to 0, and it will
display base no args constructor.
Then I come back to where I left
off, initialize double value to
zero, and you can see that that
will indeed be 0 here, now they're
both 0, right, the value in the
base as well as the double value
that just got initialized to 0
right here in the initializer list.
Then we display derived
no args constructor, and
our object is constructed.
So when it goes out of scope,
the destructors will be
called in the reverse order.
So let's do that.
You can see right here the derived
destructor is being called, and that
executes, and then we come up to here
and execute our base destructor right
here, and we'll display that as well.
Okay, so there you go.
That's a real simple example
of how we can invoke our
base class initializers.
Now I'll comment this out.
And what we'll do now is we'll do the
same thing but we'll do derived d and
we'll use an initializer of a 1000.
So I've moved the
breakpoint to this line 41.
And what we'll do now is we'll
start the debugger again, and
we'll walk through this example.
So what do we expect in this case.
Well, on line 41, we're creating a d
object which is a derived object, and
we're using a 1000 as initializer.
So we expect this constructor
right here on line 30 to be
invoked because it expects.
That's the overloaded
integer constructor.
So let's step through, and you'll see
that that that's exactly what happens.
But now before we initialize our
own variables, before we do anything
in the body of the constructor,
our base needs to be initialized.
So in this case, I'm explicitly
invoking my base class
constructor with the variable
x that was passed into me.
So what's going to happen here
is this constructor right here
on line 14 will be invoked.
So let me step through that and
you can see that's exactly where
we are, the value will be set to
x, in this case, a 1000, and then
I'll display the message, then i
come back to my derived overloaded
constructor and finish off here.
What just happened was that my
doubled value was initialized to 2000.
And I'm just about to display this.
So at this point, my object
has been fully initialized.
And if I look at d, you can see
that the base part of me is a 1000
and the doubled value part of me
is 2000, which is exactly what we
wanted and that's the issue we had in
the previous video that we couldn't
get that quite to work that way.
And of course, as I destroyed this
object, the derived destructor
gets invoked first and then the
base destructor gets invoked,
and our program is complete.
Okay, so there you go.
That's a real simple example of
how to initialize the base part of
us when we're using inheritance.
In the next video what we'll
do is we'll look at the way
that copy and move constructors
and overloaded assignment
operators work with inheritance.